README.md, before:

# Code Lab Spring 2020

Wednesdays 5:00pm–6:30pm | Design Center Room 212*

*NOTE: For Wednesday March 11, we will be in Design Center **Room 501**.

Nic Schumann (nschuman@risd.edu),
Minkyoung Kim (mkim37@risd.edu),
Marie Otsuka (motsuka@risd.edu)

Code Lab provides foundational skills training for folks interested in computation basics. It will be especially targeted towards students enrolled in [[Generative Design: Tool, System, Network](https://mkim.netlify.com/gdtsns20/)], [[Web Type](https://risd-web.github.io/webtype-spring2020/)], or [Machine Learning and Design]. This won’t be for credit, it won’t assign projects, and it won’t require any commitment other than showing up. It’s about providing support for students enrolled in rigorous computational courses who want it.

The lab section will be about 90 minutes and will meet 6 to 9 times over the course of the semester. Each meeting will consist of introducing a concept, providing you a short prompt/exercise designed to help you learn the concept, and then open work time, where we’ll walk around and support you as you solve the problem.

👉**Please [sign up here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UJF4e9RK39tvByTza2kSOql0mAdfO2C_T2cvvQUYP0s/edit?usp=sharing) by the Sunday prior to the session you plan to attend.** This way we can plan for the appropriate number of students.

# Schedule

## Code Lab Session 5: Ready, set, loop with Drawbot
Based off of the concepts introduced two weeks ago in Session 3, we’ll have a hands-on workshop using Python 3 and [Drawbot](https://jquery.com/). 

## Code Lab Session 4: Ready, set, loop with jQuery
Based off of the concepts introduced last week, we’ll have a hands-on workshop using [jQuery](https://jquery.com/). We’ll also introduce the JSON data structure as a possible application of JavaScript.

## Code Lab Session 3: Ready, set, loop
We’ll be introducing fundamental programming concepts that are relevant both on the web with JavaScript / jQuery, as well as Python.

- Basic Datatypes (Integers, Strings, Variables, Booleans)
- Structures (Lists, Objects)
- Iteration (Loops)
- Functions and Methods

## Code Lab Session 2: Let’s talk terminal

- Introduction to the terminal
- Navigating the filesystem
- Running programs
- Installing packages

## Code Lab Session 1: Let’s get organized

- Getting Started
- Text editors
- HTML, CSS, & JS: How it all comes together
- File and folder naming, where they live (paths), and how to access them (hyperlinks)
- CSS Cascading (css order and hierarchy) 
- Development environment setup
- Testing & Debugging

We will be designing future sessions based off of student needs and interests over the course of the semester. 

# Lectures
Past lecture slides are accessible on [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1Hf3KJXnk7XSb8Xmy0DBtrlfkVhqaygkB)

## Possible Upcoming Session Topics:
- Datatypes
- Structures
- Iteration (loops, etc)
- APIs and libraries
- & more...

Commit message:

[docs] adds google hangouts link

README.md, after:

# Code Lab Spring 2020

Wednesdays 5:00pm–6:30pm | Design Center Room 212*

*NOTE: For Wednesday March 11, we will be in Design Center **Room 501**.

Nic Schumann (nschuman@risd.edu),
Minkyoung Kim (mkim37@risd.edu),
Marie Otsuka (motsuka@risd.edu)

Code Lab provides foundational skills training for folks interested in computation basics. It will be especially targeted towards students enrolled in [[Generative Design: Tool, System, Network](https://mkim.netlify.com/gdtsns20/)], [[Web Type](https://risd-web.github.io/webtype-spring2020/)], or [Machine Learning and Design]. This won’t be for credit, it won’t assign projects, and it won’t require any commitment other than showing up. It’s about providing support for students enrolled in rigorous computational courses who want it.

The lab section will be about 90 minutes and will meet 6 to 9 times over the course of the semester. Each meeting will consist of introducing a concept, providing you a short prompt/exercise designed to help you learn the concept, and then open work time, where we’ll walk around and support you as you solve the problem.

👉**Please [sign up here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UJF4e9RK39tvByTza2kSOql0mAdfO2C_T2cvvQUYP0s/edit?usp=sharing) by the Sunday prior to the session you plan to attend.** This way we can plan for the appropriate number of students.

⚠️ **Code Lab has moved online!** Please join us at [this Google Hangouts](https://meet.google.com/rxe-vivf-fsx) link to participate. Sign in with your RISD email.

# Schedule

## Code Lab Session 5: Ready, set, loop with Drawbot
Based off of the concepts introduced two weeks ago in Session 3, we’ll have a hands-on workshop using Python 3 and [Drawbot](https://jquery.com/). 

## Code Lab Session 4: Ready, set, loop with jQuery
Based off of the concepts introduced last week, we’ll have a hands-on workshop using [jQuery](https://jquery.com/). We’ll also introduce the JSON data structure as a possible application of JavaScript.

## Code Lab Session 3: Ready, set, loop
We’ll be introducing fundamental programming concepts that are relevant both on the web with JavaScript / jQuery, as well as Python.

- Basic Datatypes (Integers, Strings, Variables, Booleans)
- Structures (Lists, Objects)
- Iteration (Loops)
- Functions and Methods

## Code Lab Session 2: Let’s talk terminal

- Introduction to the terminal
- Navigating the filesystem
- Running programs
- Installing packages

## Code Lab Session 1: Let’s get organized

- Getting Started
- Text editors
- HTML, CSS, & JS: How it all comes together
- File and folder naming, where they live (paths), and how to access them (hyperlinks)
- CSS Cascading (css order and hierarchy) 
- Development environment setup
- Testing & Debugging

We will be designing future sessions based off of student needs and interests over the course of the semester. 

# Lectures
Past lecture slides are accessible on [Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1Hf3KJXnk7XSb8Xmy0DBtrlfkVhqaygkB)

## Possible Upcoming Session Topics:
- Datatypes
- Structures
- Iteration (loops, etc)
- APIs and libraries
- & more...
