session-02/README.md, before:

# Code Lab Session 02: Let's Talk Terminal
Wednesday, February 26th, 5:00pm–6:30pm | Design Center Room 212


Our topic: **Three Triplets on the Terminal**! Today, we'll explore three sets of commands that help you accomplish different things in the macOS Terminal application. We'll enjoy a tasting menu of varying levels of complexity, starting with an intro to navigating around, then looking at starting and stopping processes in the terminal, and concluding with a snack-level introduction to making `HTTP` requests right from the terminal, without a browser. There will be time for some light Q&A throughout. Good? Good.

*Note: This guide assumes you're using macOS. Due to our own deficiencies, we are not able to support Windows users at this time. Dear Windows users: we're sorry. Please find a macOS user near you to look on with; many of the concepts we're covering are transferrable.*

- **Prelude: `whoami`**. Just what is this terminal thing? Why would we use it instead of a GUI, like Finder? Also, how do I make it look nice with the fonts and colors I want.
- **Vignette #1: Location and Navigation.** Let's get comfortable moving back and forth between the computer's GUI in Finder, and the terminal. We'll cover commands like:
    - `pwd` – which tells you where your terminal is in the filesystem right now.
    - `ls` – which tells you what's in a directory (the pre-Finder word for "Folder").
        - Let's also talk about `ls -l` and `ls -la` variants that show you even more information.
    - `cd` – which allows you to move your terminal around through the filesystem, just like clicking on folders in Finder.
    - *With a special bonus appearance from:*
        - `open` – a macOS utility program that lets you open files, addresses, and locations in their default programs.
        -  `clear` – free up your visual real estate.
- **Vignette #2: The Lifecycle of a Software Process**. There are two kinds of processes, programs that run for a finite amount of time and then exit, and programs intended to be run forever. For the first kind, we can just fire and forget – they'll clean up after themselves. The second kind needs management. In this short story, we'll discuss how to manage long running processes like web servers, web crawlers, and other infinite loops:
    - `ps` – which shows you all the processes your user is currently running.
        - Let's also talk about `ps gv` which shows you a bit more detail, including memory utilization.
        - Let's also talk about `ps ax`, which shows you everything thats running on your computer.
    - `chmod` – which allows you to change what your user is allowed to do with a file, including which files are executable.
    - `./` – how to actually run a process.
        - `>` – how to redirect a process's output to a file.
        - `^C` - how to kill a foreground process.
        - `&` – how to run a process in the background.
    - `kill -9` – which allows you to send control signals to processes from other terminals, and managing background processes.
    - *With a special bonus appearance from:*
        - `nano` – the worst text editor ever, but since we're in the terminal, i guess...
        - `top` – a better version of `ps`.
- **Vignette #3: Local Area Networking** Your browser is basically a really fancy rendering engine that sends and recieves HTTP traffic. If we strip all of the rendering away, we get something that's basically equivalent to `curl`, a option-laden utility that sends and received HTTP traffic.
    - `man` – a command that shows you the documentation for another terminal command. Yes, it has an unfortunate name; it's a shortening of `man`ual. *Warning:* Not all commands have manual pages.
    - `curl` – a general purpose tool for sending and receiving HTTP traffic (and lots of other kinds of network traffic). The full scope of curl is way beyond us, but everything you would ever want to know about it is [here](https://ec.haxx.se/).
        - Sending a post request with `curl -X POST`
        - Sending a post request with a header using `curl -X POST -H "{Key}: {Value}"`
- **Extra Credit: Not for Completion in Lab.** Download and install node.

Commit message:

[docs] adds a video resource for basic terminal nav.

session-02/README.md, after:

# Code Lab Session 02: Let's Talk Terminal
Wednesday, February 26th, 5:00pm–6:30pm | Design Center Room 212


Our topic: **Three Triplets on the Terminal**! Today, we'll explore three sets of commands that help you accomplish different things in the macOS Terminal application. We'll enjoy a tasting menu of varying levels of complexity, starting with an intro to navigating around, then looking at starting and stopping processes in the terminal, and concluding with a snack-level introduction to making `HTTP` requests right from the terminal, without a browser. There will be time for some light Q&A throughout. Good? Good.

*Note: This guide assumes you're using macOS. Due to our own deficiencies, we are not able to support Windows users at this time. Dear Windows users: we're sorry. Please find a macOS user near you to look on with; many of the concepts we're covering are transferrable.*

- **Prelude: `whoami`**. Just what is this terminal thing? Why would we use it instead of a GUI, like Finder? Also, how do I make it look nice with the fonts and colors I want.
- **Vignette #1: Location and Navigation.** Let's get comfortable moving back and forth between the computer's GUI in Finder, and the terminal. We'll cover commands like:
    - `pwd` – which tells you where your terminal is in the filesystem right now.
    - `ls` – which tells you what's in a directory (the pre-Finder word for "Folder").
        - Let's also talk about `ls -l` and `ls -la` variants that show you even more information.
    - `cd` – which allows you to move your terminal around through the filesystem, just like clicking on folders in Finder.
    - *With a special bonus appearance from:*
        - `open` – a macOS utility program that lets you open files, addresses, and locations in their default programs.
        -  `clear` – free up your visual real estate.
    - For those who want another look at the terminal, [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V4ShSik25Wo) has more information.
- **Vignette #2: The Lifecycle of a Software Process**. There are two kinds of processes, programs that run for a finite amount of time and then exit, and programs intended to be run forever. For the first kind, we can just fire and forget – they'll clean up after themselves. The second kind needs management. In this short story, we'll discuss how to manage long running processes like web servers, web crawlers, and other infinite loops:
    - `ps` – which shows you all the processes your user is currently running.
        - Let's also talk about `ps gv` which shows you a bit more detail, including memory utilization.
        - Let's also talk about `ps ax`, which shows you everything thats running on your computer.
    - `chmod` – which allows you to change what your user is allowed to do with a file, including which files are executable.
    - `./` – how to actually run a process.
        - `>` – how to redirect a process's output to a file.
        - `^C` - how to kill a foreground process.
        - `&` – how to run a process in the background.
    - `kill -9` – which allows you to send control signals to processes from other terminals, and managing background processes.
    - *With a special bonus appearance from:*
        - `nano` – the worst text editor ever, but since we're in the terminal, i guess...
        - `top` – a better version of `ps`.
- **Vignette #3: Local Area Networking** Your browser is basically a really fancy rendering engine that sends and recieves HTTP traffic. If we strip all of the rendering away, we get something that's basically equivalent to `curl`, a option-laden utility that sends and receives HTTP traffic through the terminal.
    - `man` – a command that shows you the documentation for another terminal command. Yes, it has an unfortunate name; it's a shortening of `man`ual. *Warning:* Not all commands have manual pages.
    - `curl` – a general purpose tool for sending and receiving HTTP traffic (and lots of other kinds of network traffic). The full scope of curl is way beyond us, but everything you would ever want to know about it is [here](https://ec.haxx.se/).
        - Sending a post request with `curl -X POST`
        - Sending a post request with a header using `curl -X POST -H "{Key}: {Value}"`
- **Extra Credit: Not for Completion in Lab.** Try to run the server in `session-02/vignette-03` on your own. This will include downloading and installing `node` and `npm`, installing the dependencies for the server with `npm install`, and running the server with `node index.js`.
